documentation/backward_compatibility.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Backward Compatibility
parent: Documentation
nav_order: 10
---
Backward Compatibility
==========

- [Backward Compatibility](#backward-compatibility)
  - [What It Means](#what-it-means)
  - [Demo](#demo)
  - [Comparing Two Contracts (Contract vs Contract)](#comparing-two-contracts-contract-vs-contract)
  - [Validating Changes In Git On Your Laptop](#validating-changes-in-git-on-your-laptop)
  - [Validating Changes In CI](#validating-changes-in-ci)
  - [Handling Contracts In Progress](#handling-contracts-in-progress)
  - [Rules Of Thumb](#rules-of-thumb)

<img alt="Contract vs Contract" href="https://specmatic.in/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/Compatability.png" width="490" height="310" />

## What It Means

If an API provider implementing a change to a contract would become incompatible with existing consumers due to the change, the changes to the contract are NOT backward compatible.

Aim to make all changes to a contract backward compatible, to ensure that an updated API provider can be deployed as soon as it is ready, without waiting for consumers to catchup.

To that end, Specmatic can provide instant feedback when a change to an API provider will break consumers by looking at the old and new contract. This feedback only requires the contract. No code needs to be written, saving the provider the effort of writing code, and 

## Demo

[Watch this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vBwzEpnQ7To&t=1197s) to see it in action. Read on to read about it and even try it out yourself!

## Comparing Two Contracts (Contract vs Contract)

Create a file named api_products_v1.yaml.

```yaml
# filename api_products_v1.yaml
openapi: 3.0.0
info:
  title: Sample Product API
  description: Optional multiline or single-line description in [CommonMark](http://commonmark.org/help/) or HTML.
  version: 0.1.9
servers:
  - url: http://localhost:8080
    description: Local
  - url: http://localhost:9000
    description: Specmatic Stub Server
paths:
  /products/{id}:
    get:
      summary: Get Products
      description: Get Products
      parameters:
        - in: path
          name: id
          schema:
            type: number
          required: true
          description: Numerical Product Id
      responses:
        '200':
          description: Returns Product With Id
          content:
            application/json:
              schema:
                type: object
                required:
                  - name
                properties:
                  name:
                    type: string
                  sku:
                    type: string
```

This contract contains an API for fetching the details of a product.

Let's add a new api to create a product record:

```yaml
# filename api_products_v1-2.yaml
openapi: 3.0.0
info:
  title: Sample Product API
  description: Optional multiline or single-line description in [CommonMark](http://commonmark.org/help/) or HTML.
  version: 0.1.9
servers:
  - url: http://localhost:8080
    description: Local
  - url: http://localhost:9000
    description: Specmatic Stub Server
paths:
  /products/{id}:
    get:
      summary: Get Products
      description: Get Products
      parameters:
        - in: path
          name: id
          schema:
            type: number
          required: true
          description: Numerical Product Id
      responses:
        '200':
          description: Returns Product With Id
          content:
            application/json:
              schema:
                type: object
                required:
                  - name
                properties:
                  name:
                    type: string
                  sku:
                    type: string
  /products:
    post:
      summary: Add Product
      description: Add Product
      requestBody:
        content:
          application/json:
            schema:
              type: object
              required:
                - name
              properties:
                name:
                  type: string
                sku:
                  type: string
                  nullable: true
      responses:
        '200':
          description: Returns Product With Id
          content:
            application/json:
              schema:
                type: object
                required:
                  - id
                properties:
                  id:
                    type: integer
```

The old /products/{id} API remains intact, and the new /products API is added on.

The newer contract is backward compatible with the older, as existing consumers are only using the old API, which remains unchanged.

Run the specmatic compare command to confirm this, and see the result:

```bash
> java -jar specmatic.jar compare api_products_v1.yaml api_products_v1-2.yaml

The newer contract is backward compatible
```

Let's change the original contract of square to return "sku" as a numeric value instead of string in the response:

```yaml
# filename api_products_v2.yaml
openapi: 3.0.0
info:
  title: Sample Product API
  description: Optional multiline or single-line description in [CommonMark](http://commonmark.org/help/) or HTML.
  version: 0.1.9
servers:
  - url: http://localhost:8080
    description: Local
  - url: http://localhost:9000
    description: Specmatic Stub Server
paths:
  /products/{id}:
    get:
      summary: Get Products
      description: Get Products
      parameters:
        - in: path
          name: id
          schema:
            type: number
          required: true
          description: Numerical Product Id
      responses:
        '200':
          description: Returns Product With Id
          content:
            application/json:
              schema:
                type: object
                required:
                  - name
                properties:
                  name:
                    type: string
                  sku:
                    type: integer
```

Note that the file name of the above file is api_products_v2.yaml.

Now try it again:

```bash
> java -jar specmatic.jar compare api_math_v1.yaml api_math_v2.yaml

In scenario "Get Products. Response: Returns Product With Id"
API: GET /products/(id:number) -> 200

  >> RESPONSE.BODY.sku

     This is number in the new contract response but string in the old contract

The newer contract is not backward compatible.
```

Specmatic will show you an error message, saying that the change is not backward compatible. The reason for this is that existing consumers are expecting a string "sku", but will get an "integer" instead.

If the change is not backward compatible, the compare command exits with exit code 1. You can use this in a script.

## Validating Changes In Git On Your Laptop

If api_products_v1.yaml is in a git repository, and the change is backward compatible, make the change directly to the v1 file instead of creating a new one.

Then to confirm that it is a backward compatible change, before committing the change, run this command:

```bash
java -jar specmatic.jar compatible git file ./run/specmatic/examples/api_products_v1.yaml
```

This command exits with exit code 1 if the change is backward incompatible. It can be configured as a git pre-commit hook.

## Validating Changes In CI

In CI, you will need to compare the changes in a contract from one commit to the next.

You can do this with the following command:

```bash
> java -jar specmatic.jar compatible git commits api_products_v1.yaml HEAD HEAD^1
```

You can even use commit hashes here if you wish to compare any other pair of commits.

This command exits with exit code 1 if the change is backward incompatible.

## Handling Contracts In Progress

APIs whose design is still in progress can be tagged WIP in the OpenAPI contract. Specmatic will not break builds or return failure on when it see backward incompatible changes to WIP APIs. It will still print the error feedback.

```yaml
# filename api_products_v1.yaml
openapi: 3.0.0
info:
  title: Sample Product API
  description: Optional multiline or single-line description in [CommonMark](http://commonmark.org/help/) or HTML.
  version: 0.1.9
servers:
  - url: http://localhost:8080
    description: Local
  - url: http://localhost:9000
    description: Specmatic Stub Server
paths:
  /products/{id}:
    get:
      summary: Get Products
      description: Get Products
      parameters:
        - in: path
          name: id
          schema:
            type: number
          required: true
          description: Numerical Product Id
      responses:
        '200':
          description: Returns Product With Id
          content:
            application/json:
              schema:
                type: object
                required:
                  - name
                properties:
                  name:
                    type: string
                  sku:
                    type: string
  /products:
    post:
      summary: Add Product
      description: Add Product
      requestBody:
        content:
          application/json:
            schema:
              type: object
              required:
                - name
              properties:
                name:
                  type: string
                sku:
                  type: string
                  nullable: true
      responses:
        '200':
          description: Returns Product With Id
          content:
            application/json:
              schema:
                type: object
                required:
                  - id
                properties:
                  id:
                    type: integer
```

Once the contract is complete you can remove the WIP tag.

## Rules Of Thumb

Maintaining backward compatibility is about changing the API provider WITHOUT breaking any existing consumer. Consumers should just continue working as-is, without needing to "keep up".

Here are some rules of thumb to keep in mind.

1. The provider should not expect existing consumers to send something they were not sending before in the request. For example, don't add a compulsory JSON key to any request contract.
2. The provider should not send back anything that consumers were not expecting before in the response. For example, don't remove a JSON key from any response.

Commit message:

added link to backward compatibility rules

documentation/backward_compatibility.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Backward Compatibility
parent: Documentation
nav_order: 10
---
Backward Compatibility
==========

- [Backward Compatibility](#backward-compatibility)
  - [What It Means](#what-it-means)
  - [Demo](#demo)
  - [Comparing Two Contracts (Contract vs Contract)](#comparing-two-contracts-contract-vs-contract)
  - [Validating Changes In Git On Your Laptop](#validating-changes-in-git-on-your-laptop)
  - [Validating Changes In CI](#validating-changes-in-ci)
  - [Handling Contracts In Progress](#handling-contracts-in-progress)
  - [Backward Compatibility Rules](#backward-compatibility-rules)

<img alt="Contract vs Contract" href="https://specmatic.in/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/Compatability.png" width="490" height="310" />

## What It Means

If an API provider implementing a change to a contract would become incompatible with existing consumers due to the change, the changes to the contract are NOT backward compatible.

Aim to make all changes to a contract backward compatible, to ensure that an updated API provider can be deployed as soon as it is ready, without waiting for consumers to catchup.

To that end, Specmatic can provide instant feedback when a change to an API provider will break consumers by looking at the old and new contract. This feedback only requires the contract. No code needs to be written, saving the provider the effort of writing code, and 

## Demo

[Watch this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vBwzEpnQ7To&t=1197s) to see it in action. Read on to read about it and even try it out yourself!

## Comparing Two Contracts (Contract vs Contract)

Create a file named api_products_v1.yaml.

```yaml
# filename api_products_v1.yaml
openapi: 3.0.0
info:
  title: Sample Product API
  description: Optional multiline or single-line description in [CommonMark](http://commonmark.org/help/) or HTML.
  version: 0.1.9
servers:
  - url: http://localhost:8080
    description: Local
  - url: http://localhost:9000
    description: Specmatic Stub Server
paths:
  /products/{id}:
    get:
      summary: Get Products
      description: Get Products
      parameters:
        - in: path
          name: id
          schema:
            type: number
          required: true
          description: Numerical Product Id
      responses:
        '200':
          description: Returns Product With Id
          content:
            application/json:
              schema:
                type: object
                required:
                  - name
                properties:
                  name:
                    type: string
                  sku:
                    type: string
```

This contract contains an API for fetching the details of a product.

Let's add a new api to create a product record:

```yaml
# filename api_products_v1-2.yaml
openapi: 3.0.0
info:
  title: Sample Product API
  description: Optional multiline or single-line description in [CommonMark](http://commonmark.org/help/) or HTML.
  version: 0.1.9
servers:
  - url: http://localhost:8080
    description: Local
  - url: http://localhost:9000
    description: Specmatic Stub Server
paths:
  /products/{id}:
    get:
      summary: Get Products
      description: Get Products
      parameters:
        - in: path
          name: id
          schema:
            type: number
          required: true
          description: Numerical Product Id
      responses:
        '200':
          description: Returns Product With Id
          content:
            application/json:
              schema:
                type: object
                required:
                  - name
                properties:
                  name:
                    type: string
                  sku:
                    type: string
  /products:
    post:
      summary: Add Product
      description: Add Product
      requestBody:
        content:
          application/json:
            schema:
              type: object
              required:
                - name
              properties:
                name:
                  type: string
                sku:
                  type: string
                  nullable: true
      responses:
        '200':
          description: Returns Product With Id
          content:
            application/json:
              schema:
                type: object
                required:
                  - id
                properties:
                  id:
                    type: integer
```

The old /products/{id} API remains intact, and the new /products API is added on.

The newer contract is backward compatible with the older, as existing consumers are only using the old API, which remains unchanged.

Run the specmatic compare command to confirm this, and see the result:

```bash
> java -jar specmatic.jar compare api_products_v1.yaml api_products_v1-2.yaml

The newer contract is backward compatible
```

Let's change the original contract of square to return "sku" as a numeric value instead of string in the response:

```yaml
# filename api_products_v2.yaml
openapi: 3.0.0
info:
  title: Sample Product API
  description: Optional multiline or single-line description in [CommonMark](http://commonmark.org/help/) or HTML.
  version: 0.1.9
servers:
  - url: http://localhost:8080
    description: Local
  - url: http://localhost:9000
    description: Specmatic Stub Server
paths:
  /products/{id}:
    get:
      summary: Get Products
      description: Get Products
      parameters:
        - in: path
          name: id
          schema:
            type: number
          required: true
          description: Numerical Product Id
      responses:
        '200':
          description: Returns Product With Id
          content:
            application/json:
              schema:
                type: object
                required:
                  - name
                properties:
                  name:
                    type: string
                  sku:
                    type: integer
```

Note that the file name of the above file is api_products_v2.yaml.

Now try it again:

```bash
> java -jar specmatic.jar compare api_math_v1.yaml api_math_v2.yaml

In scenario "Get Products. Response: Returns Product With Id"
API: GET /products/(id:number) -> 200

  >> RESPONSE.BODY.sku

     This is number in the new contract response but string in the old contract

The newer contract is not backward compatible.
```

Specmatic will show you an error message, saying that the change is not backward compatible. The reason for this is that existing consumers are expecting a string "sku", but will get an "integer" instead.

If the change is not backward compatible, the compare command exits with exit code 1. You can use this in a script.

## Validating Changes In Git On Your Laptop

If api_products_v1.yaml is in a git repository, and the change is backward compatible, make the change directly to the v1 file instead of creating a new one.

Then to confirm that it is a backward compatible change, before committing the change, run this command:

```bash
java -jar specmatic.jar compatible git file ./run/specmatic/examples/api_products_v1.yaml
```

This command exits with exit code 1 if the change is backward incompatible. It can be configured as a git pre-commit hook.

## Validating Changes In CI

In CI, you will need to compare the changes in a contract from one commit to the next.

You can do this with the following command:

```bash
> java -jar specmatic.jar compatible git commits api_products_v1.yaml HEAD HEAD^1
```

You can even use commit hashes here if you wish to compare any other pair of commits.

This command exits with exit code 1 if the change is backward incompatible.

## Handling Contracts In Progress

APIs whose design is still in progress can be tagged WIP in the OpenAPI contract. Specmatic will not break builds or return failure on when it see backward incompatible changes to WIP APIs. It will still print the error feedback.

```yaml
# filename api_products_v1.yaml
openapi: 3.0.0
info:
  title: Sample Product API
  description: Optional multiline or single-line description in [CommonMark](http://commonmark.org/help/) or HTML.
  version: 0.1.9
servers:
  - url: http://localhost:8080
    description: Local
  - url: http://localhost:9000
    description: Specmatic Stub Server
paths:
  /products/{id}:
    get:
      summary: Get Products
      description: Get Products
      parameters:
        - in: path
          name: id
          schema:
            type: number
          required: true
          description: Numerical Product Id
      responses:
        '200':
          description: Returns Product With Id
          content:
            application/json:
              schema:
                type: object
                required:
                  - name
                properties:
                  name:
                    type: string
                  sku:
                    type: string
  /products:
    post:
      summary: Add Product
      description: Add Product
      requestBody:
        content:
          application/json:
            schema:
              type: object
              required:
                - name
              properties:
                name:
                  type: string
                sku:
                  type: string
                  nullable: true
      responses:
        '200':
          description: Returns Product With Id
          content:
            application/json:
              schema:
                type: object
                required:
                  - id
                properties:
                  id:
                    type: integer
```

Once the contract is complete you can remove the WIP tag.

## Backward Compatibility Rules

Maintaining backward compatibility is about changing the API provider WITHOUT breaking any existing consumer. Consumers should just continue working as-is, without needing to "keep up".

[Read this for more](https://specmatic.in/documentation/backward_compatibility_rules.html).
